---
title: "Today I Learned [3] 03.07.2026"
date: 2026-07-03
comments: true
tags: ["c++", "const", "volatile", "cv-qualifiers", "type system"]
summary: "How the `volatile` qualifier can be used in a class member function declaration"
---

Today I Learned that in C++, the `volatile` qualifier can be used not only for variables but also for member functions of a class. This is done in the same way as the `const` qualifier, by placing it after the function's parameter list. For example:
{{< code cpp >}}
class MyClass {
public:
    void myFunction() volatile {
        // This function can be called on volatile instances of MyClass
    }
};
{{< /code >}}
It works similarly to `const` member functions, which can be called on `const` instances of a class. A `volatile` member function can be called on `volatile` instances of the class. This is mostly relevant for low-level code, such as memory-mapped I/O or hardware-facing interfaces.
A `volatile` member function can call other `volatile` member functions. However, it cannot call non-`volatile` member functions on the same object, because inside such a function `this` is treated as a pointer to a `volatile` object. Data members do not need to be declared `volatile` individually: when they are accessed through a `volatile` object, those accesses are treated as `volatile`.
{{< code cpp >}}
class MyClass {
public:
    void myFunction() volatile {
        // Access goes through a volatile object
        myMember = 42; // OK
        anotherVolatileFunction(); // OK
        // nonVolatileFunction(); // Error: cannot call non-volatile member function from volatile context
    }
    void anotherVolatileFunction() volatile {
        // Another volatile member function
    }
    void nonVolatileFunction() {
        // This function cannot be called on volatile instances of MyClass
    }
private:
    int myMember;
};
{{< /code >}}

This feature is mostly useful in embedded systems and other low-level code, where an object may represent hardware state or memory-mapped registers.
It is important to note that `volatile` does not provide synchronization, atomicity, or thread-safety guarantees. In C++, it is not a replacement for atomics or mutexes and should not be used for inter-thread communication.

To summarize, the `volatile` qualifier can be applied to member functions the same way as `const`. It affects which objects the function may be called on and how `this` is qualified inside the function. It is a niche but valid feature, mostly relevant in embedded systems and low-level programming.

"Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever." - Mahatma Gandhi
